We start with breaking news
out of the Middle East.
A short time ago,
Benny
Gantz, a key
minister of the Israeli war cabinet,
announced that he is quitting
the emergency government.
We leave the government,
the emergency government
with a heavy heart,
but your complete heart.
We stand again
for the campaign for Israel,
for General issues
in order to get real victory.
So we are going to go
for elections carefully
and at the end of it will have
a government
that will have the
confidence of the people.
GANTZ His resignation
marks a pivotal moment
in Israel's war against Hamas
and a major blow to Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu,
who was facing mounting pressure
to end the conflict in Gaza.
His departure comes
just a day after Netanyahu
failed to meet Gantz's
ultimatum,
which was calling for a postwar
plan in Gaza. By June eight,
Gantz delayed his announcement
after Israeli forces
rescued four hostages
from Hamas militants in Gaza.
Gantz
was to make his announcement yesterday,
which was that deadline of June 8th,
but instead had it.
Today, CNN
has correspondents tracking
all of these developments
around the world.
Let's begin
with CNN's Paula Hancocks
live for us in Tel Aviv Paula.
So Gantz had been facing pressure
to stay in place in recent days.
Netanyahu publicly
asking him to stay even members
of the Biden administration
were urging him to stay.
So why did he come to this decision?
Well, Fred,
what he said in that statement
just a little earlier
this Sunday evening
was that with the Israeli
prime minister,
Benjamin Netanyahu, at the helm,
that the state of Israel
could not be victorious.
He said that Israel needed somebody
who put the hostages ahead of politics.
Now,
he has been very
critical of Benjamin Netanyahu
in recent months.
Just last month,
he said that if there weren't
certain conditions that were met,
then he was going to have to walk away
from the emergency government.
Now, those conditions were
a definitive and decisive plan
to get the hostages back.
We know that Gantz has been very vocal
about his support
for the proposal
that's on the table at the moment,
the proposal that U.S.
and Israeli officials
are waiting
for an official response from Hamas.
He also said he wants to have a day
after strategy
so the day after the war ends.
What exactly is the plan for Gaza?
Now, Netanyahu has been very vague
over recent months when it comes to that.
And then he also wanted a plan
to calm down the situation
on the northern border
with Hezbollah in southern Lebanon,
saying that there are tens of thousands
of Israeli residents
who want to be able
to move back to their homes.
They've been evacuated for many months
now because of tensions there.
So he has said that
those were the reasons
he needed to step down.
Now, what this means,
it doesn't mean that
the government collapses.
Netanyahu still has a slim majority,
so can continue.
But it does mean that
he is far more isolated now.
Both domestically and internationally.
We know that he has a very far right
element to his coalition.
And Gantz had been seen
as a counterweight to that.
He was a key member of the war cabinet.
There was three
members
that were the main members of that.
The prime minister, the defense minister,
Benny Gantz.
So a third of that key
war cabinet has now stepped down.
And we know that
that the far right
wing of Ben-gvir for example,
the Minister for National Security,
wants to be part of that war cabinet.
So there is a fear that that could be
less of a counterweight
to the far right elements,
and that is certainly not welcome here
for many in Israel.
He is a popular figure.
Benny Gantz,
we've also heard as well, though,
fears of what this means
for the hostage deal, the cease fire deal
that is on the table.
At this point,
we've had a statement from the
the group that represents
the families of those
that are being held hostage.
And they say they hope
it won't make a difference to that deal.
That deal remains as it is,
and they hope that it will be signed
and agreed to very quickly Fred.
All right, Paula, thank you so much.
Let's go now to CNN's Ben
Wedeman in Beirut Ben.
You know, officials in Gaza
claim Israel's
raid left more than 270 people dead.
Israel disputing that number, saying
the casualties were under 100.
What is the reaction like where you are?
Well, certainly, I think
across the Middle East,
across the Arab world,
there's one of shock
at the high number of casualties
as a result of that operation
that happened yesterday.
Now, we did get a breakdown
from the Palestinian Ministry of Health
in Gaza.
Of that 274 dead yesterday,
they said 64 of the dead were children,
57 were women and 37 were elderly people.
And certainly
from the video we saw yesterday,
there were a lot of wounded children
and women among those being treated
in the hospitals
in the central part of Gaza.
And, of course,
keep in mind
that many of the people
who had taken refuge
in Rafah in the far
south of the Gaza Strip
had moved north
because of Israel's operation there.
So they do say that refugee camp
was teeming
with people who thought
they would be safe.
And of course, the operation
took place at 11:00 in the morning
on a Saturday
when people were out and about.
There was a market nearby
where many of the Israeli
ordnance landed, and that would explain
why there's such a high death toll.
And, of course, people who were there
describe a scene that was absolutely
horrific.
So, of course, the
increasing bombardment
started hitting everywhere,
something we never witnessed before.
You can maybe 150 rockets fell
in less than 10 minutes
while we were running away.
A lot more fell on the market
for good reason.
And
there are children torn apart
and scattered in the streets.
And they wiped out Nusrat.
It is hell on earth.
And the worry, of course, now
is that after this operation where
Prime Minister Netanyahu can brag
that military action
brought about the freedom
of some of the hostages,
that perhaps Israel
will be putting that 31st of May
Biden cease
fire proposal on the back burner
and will continue
with the military option Fredricka.
All right, Ben Wedeman in Beirut,
thank you so much.
On to CNN's Priscilla Alvarez
now in Wilmington, Delaware,
where President Biden
will soon be returning
following his overseas trip.
Priscilla,
how is the White House
reacting to the news of
Benny Gantz's departure?
Well, the White House
is not commenting on it at this point,
but we do know that U.S.
officials have been concerned
about his departure,
jeopardizing those ongoing hostage
and cease fire negotiations.
And behind the scenes, U.S.
officials have been urging him
not to leave the government,
making the case that it could impact
those ongoing talks.
And, of course, Benny
Gantz had visited Washington before.
He had met in March with Vice President
Kamala Harris and national security
adviser Jake Sullivan
to talk about the ongoing cease fire
negotiations and also the day
after planning for Gaza.
Now, that was in opposition
to Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu,
and the White House defended
those talks at the time,
saying that it was appropriate,
given his position
and that the discussions
were focused on the Israel Hamas war.
Now, of course, leading up to today,
the other question was
whether or not
President Biden's proposal
that for the release of hostages
in exchange for that cease fire
would reverse his decision,
that he had outlined that on May 31st,
that those three phases
and really put pressure on Israel
and all of the parties
involved to reach an agreement.
But we now know today
that that did not reverse his decision.
And instead, Benny Gantz
is departing the government.
This also, of course, coming on
the heels of the operation
that you just heard Ben
talk about, that rescue operation
that occurred yesterday.
Now, today,
the national security adviser,
Jake Sullivan, was asked
about that on CNN.
And whether the US was comfortable,
given the toll on civilians.
Take a listen to what he had to say.
The president himself has said
in recent days
that the Palestinian people
are going through sheer
hell in this conflict
because Hamas is operating
in a way that puts them in the crossfire,
that holds hostages
right in the heart of crowded
civilian areas.
Unfortunately, we are going to continue
to see ongoing conflict
and military operations
in which Israel makes efforts
to recover its citizens and frankly,
to recover American citizens.
What we would much prefer to see
is a cease fire
where the hostages come out peacefully.
So you heard the national security
adviser there continuing to push
for a diplomatic solution.
That is what we continue
to hear from senior U.S.
officials across the board.
Of course, the president
currently on his way back
from France to here,
Wilmington, Delaware,
where reporters will have a chance
to ask him questions about this
latest news Fred.
All right.
Priscila Alvarez, thank you so much.